---
title: "March 4, 2003 - Alexandria, Virginia - Birchmere"
date: 2019-03-04T00:00:01-08:00
image: 'images/2003-03-04.jpg'
draft: false

---

## Context

Fate would have it that King Crimson had booked two shows for Alexandria on this tour. So with Adrian Belew feeling more himself the Birchmere gets a proper King Crimson performance. Though it's a bit wobbly as the band is still findings its feet with the tour material and Adrian's still in recovery mode.

It's a testament to how ballsy this group is that none of the material here predates 1995 in the band's history.

It's worth noting that the band was also at Toad's Place in New Haven on this date in 1982 and in Cleveland in 1972, but no known recordings of these shows exist.

## Listening Notes

**The ConstruKction of Light**

We join the proceedings with TCoL already in flight. We're just ahead of the first Soaring section (as I like to call it). Pat's taking the band at a good clip through this and the band sounds fast and fresh here. I'm loving Trey's low-end in these Birchmere recordings.

Adrian's lyric comes in and he sounds great. Maybe a little congested. There's a bit of a stumble in Robert's arpeggio at the very end. Unfortunate that this performance is clipped at the beginning because the band sounds pretty good.

**ProzaKc Blues**

In my opinion this piece didn't really start to get decent until these 2003 performances. The 2000 and 2001 performances were a bit hokey for me. I enjoy the lyric mostly. Adrian's slide-ish guitar solo is lovely gritty here.

The breakdown in the "shaved off my head" lyric section will only get better as the tour goes on, but here it already has a bit of funk.

Adrian unleashes a grinding solo after the final verse. And he gives a bit of an Elvis "Thank you very much" at the end. He apologizes for not being at the previous night's show which he heard was amazing. But is that a trustworthy account? Because it came from Robert.

**Elektrik**

Triple oboe/clarinet sounds ring in the beginning of Elektrik in a bit of an uneven intro.

I have always seen this piece as a visual journey of ascending a huge spiraling grand staircase that gets more treacherous as it goes. It has ascending sections, plateau sections, free climb sections, and floating sections. There's also a monster climax section of metal chords towards the end before the final ascent. :)

The ascending sections involve interlocking guitar phrases. In the plateau sections they involve circulations where Robert and Adrian trade notes of a phrase. In the free-climbing sections Robert and Adrian are playing in unison. 

In the first climbing section Robert and Adrian get out of tune with one another here. There's also more wobbly-ness in one of the early plateau sections.

The monster section redeems the piece a bit here.

**The Power to Believe I**

Ahhh.... chimes and bells and the auto-tuned vocal of perhaps my favorite Belew Crimson lyric. When I first heard this piece on an advance listen of the album _The Power to Believe_ I wept. It came at a time where I was completely engrossed in everything Fripp/Crimson did musically. And I thought there was nothing they could do to surprise me. _The Power to Believe_ lyric surprised me. It wasn't what I expected, but was unmistakably Crimson. In fact I think much of what Belew, Fripp, Gunn, and Mastelotto do from 1998-2002 is try almost desparately to find a voice for Crimson in the material they're working on. And there are hits and misses along the way.

It took until _The Power to Believe_ before they found steady footing.

**Level Five**

A monster insta-classic Crimson instrumental. It's more concise than it's predecessor and set list partner Larks' Tongues in Aspic Part IV. It provides a great showcase for each of the players without diminishing the piece as a whole.

And we've got a stomper here in Alexandria. Mastelotto's machinations drive this whole piece forward. The maze of programmed and live percussion conjured here is dizzying.

Adrian's solo includes some wild bends and warps in it here. It's wonderful to compare this with the rendition the night before and get a fresh perspective on what Ade brings to this piece as a stunt guitarist.

Adrian hollers along with the crowd at the conclusion of the piece.

**Eyes Wide Open**

A latter-day Crimson ballad piece that has a kind of uneven rushy feeling through the verses probably due to Pat's hi-hat substitute ticking away at quarter time and a busy bass line from Trey.

Here we get as honorable rendition of this as we might here on this tour. And it fits well after _Level Five_ and ahead of _Happy_

**Happy With What You Have to Be Happy With**

I love the gritty nu-metal of this piece and I love the concept of the lyric, but Adrian's voice is just too... nice? for much of the delivery.

Adrian lets loose a sparkling backwards guitar solo in the before the chorus repeat.

**The Power to Believe II**

I love the effected, weird snake charmer flute that intros the piece. Something from Adrian presumably? I'm going to have to go back and watch a video recording of this piece. It adds credence to the notion that TPTB II's musical heritage derives from that other Crimson stalwart _The Talking Drum_.

Robert puts together a creeping, menacing solo to go along with that lovely bass line from Trey.

The searing guitar fades away and we're greeted by the raindrop charm of tuned percussion. Adrian brings in the TPTB theme. I love how this piece invokes the multi-percussionist aspect of previous and future Crimsons. Adrian sings the drifting lovely lyric in the midst of this melodic cacophony. 

It's easy to lose oneself here and wish that this floating beautiful music would just go on forever. Robert adds some string-based scapes to the mix. The weight and importance of the TPTB theme is a wonderful bit of yearning Crimson theater.

Pat brings the Earth back into view with some stomping drums and Robert gives a universe-tears solo over the top of it. 

"I think the drugs are starting to take effect. The antibiotics that is," Adrian shares at the conclusion of that epic-ness.

**FaKcts of Life**

We're back to some stomping nu-metal. Adrian offers a subdued vocal performance here at the start almost spoken word. 

I've always been drawn to Adrian's eco-justice lyrics and this is a fucking gem of environmental and existential commentary by Adrian. 

"Six billion ands crawling on a plate. 
    None of them give back as much as they take."
    
"Just because you can
    Doesn't mean you should"

And Robert's solo punctuation to these phrases is fantastic.

I love the driving metal section break down after the "Some of us kill what some of us eat" section and I've always felt this could have been longer. Gunn's deep growling bass is f'ing lovely in this recording.

Robert unloads with a wonderful slashing solo as only he can. This is a diamond solo. Brilliant.

"Nobody knows what happens when you die.
    Believe what you want, it doesn't mean you're right"
    
Just ace stuff.

Adrian lets out a woop as the piece comes to its conclusion.

**The World's My Oyster Soup Kitchen Floor Wax Museum**

The slighly older musical cousin to FaKcts and grand nephew to _Elephant Talk_ we're off on a journey of Adrian wordplay. This piece lives and dies based on Adrian's performance and the guitar solos for me.

Despite his illness Adrian seems to have plenty of energy here in the vocal performance and in a searing solo. 

"Play it for me spider fingers," Adrian requests. Robert takes his time and then tinkles away on his demented ivory. It's a barely recognizable piano sound. And it plays on into the final refrain. There's a grand pause and Robert has fun with the space winding up the piece.

**Dangerous Curves**

With that we're off into the final act of our performance. Trading on the musical structure of Gustav Holst's _Mars_ we have _Dangerous Curves_ emerging out of the void.

This is also a piece that I'll never get tired of. I love Gunn's roving, searching bass line and Adrian's straight-jacket guitar. I haven't listened to this piece in probably nine years or so. Gods, it's terrifying and lovely.

The point at about 3:35 where it breaks down into this terrifying robotic scream is just... massive. In some ways this is just a simple building ensemble piece. In other ways it is a texture showcase for Pat's drumming.

It comes to a conclusion just a bit abruptly on that final magic chord of terror, wonder, and hope in this performance. But it's still beastly.

**Larks' Tongues in Aspic Part IV**

With that we're launched into the industrial metal ascent of the Crimson firebird.

And this is a great rendition of this piece. Robert's rips through his fast running lines. Adrian and Trey sound great in harmony on this recording.

There is a section to this piece that I call the Boring section (sorry KC), between Robert's fast running lines section and Adrian's solo Robert's adding strings to to the rest of the band members the piece doesn't really go anywhere. It just repeats some of its opening sructure. BUT there can be some gems in the Boring section. Here it's Trey's growl-y bass.

Adrian's solo section is barely controlled madness before merging into the song theme section which is one of the great examples of Robert and Adrian as co-composers (in my opinion).

And with that we're at the end of the main set. Lots of celebratory applause before...

**The Power to Believe III**

_Deception of the Thrush_ by any other name.

This rendition begins with this interesting punctuated organ sound (coming from Pat?) beneath Trey's talker once again conjuring T.S. Elliot. This is a fantastic beginning!

Robert unloads a galaxy-warping solo in the middle section of the piece.

The final section of Soaring Redemption Wonderment has some odd wobbles in the string section and a somewhat subdued solo from Trey with a nice closure.

**VROOOM**

Grunge Crimson storms ahead! Here Trey's growling bass serves the theme well and Pat plays around with the rhythm enough to make the piece sound fresh. 

This one is an honorable stomper which ends with an interesting floating sustain from Robert.

It's hard not to feel like this was a bit of a denouement of an encore and the real thrust of this show was between _The Power to Believe I_ and _Larks' Tongues IV_



  

 

  










 


  






