---
title: "February 25. Nashville 1997 AND Miami Beach 1972"
date: 2019-02-25T00:00:00-01:00
image: 'images/1997-02-25.jpg'
draft: false
---

## Context

We're doing it! We're breaking the rules.

One of the rules I had when starting this exercise is that as we move into dates that have multiple King Crimson events in different years that I would pick one and just cover that. But we've got two interesting recordings from this date and I think they both bear some mentioning.

We'll start backwards (or forwards?) with a continuation of sessions on February 1997 featuring Adrian, Robert, and Trey working through more ideas that would later go on to be a good part of _Larks' Tongues in Aspic Part IV_. 

Then we'll jump to 1972 and reflect on a rough (and I mean rough) sounding bootleg from the Florida stretch of the ongoing tour of 1972.

## Listening Notes 

### February 25, 1997 - Nashville, TN - SIR Studios

The unmistakable stomping chords of _Larks' Tongues in Aspic Part IV_ greet us immediately. Followed by the climbing scales of odd and terrifying origins. It's strange to hear this staple of 2000-2003 live performance stepping into the world with so much of the ideas fully formed. 

Not only do the ideas match the structure that eventually ends up on _The ConstruKction of Light_ album in 2000, but the players sound like they've got a good sense of it already. It's interesting to hear them (particularly Ade and Trey) work on their parts during the circulation-ish multi-part section before the angelic chords come in around the 4 minute mark.

It's interesting to hear Robert's solo also sounding much as it would four years down the line from this session. 

"I can have fun with that." -- Robert

[Purchase King Crimson at SIR Studios in Nashville, TN from DGM Live](https://dgmlive.com/tour-dates/1860)

### February 25, 1972 - Miami Beach, FL - The Auditorium

**Pictures of a City**

Sourced from a rough audience bootleg this is a tough listen, but worth it for a few points I'd like to highlight.

First, it's fun to hear the audience as performer, band as background dynamic to this performance. You hear an "Oh my" early on in the performance of _Pictures of a City_ and you get a sense that a few of the folks attending are already getting their minds tickled.

During the fast running lines section of Pictures Robert really takes off. This feels faster than anything we've heard to date on this tour. He's running ahead and daring the band to catch up with him. It's breakneck stuff.

During Mel's solo in the jazz breakdown he pulls out these long, bleating horn notes that are eerie and beautiful.

The piece is met with rapturous applause at the end.

**Formentera Lady**

The conversation starts up around the audience mic as the opening part of Formentera plays out. Clearly folks are using this time to talk about what they heard and saw in Pictures rather than engaging with the ballad.

Fripp's guitar and Collins flute are super lively in this performance. RF coming through better on the recording than most of the rest of the band. Ian's still doing some take on indian drum sounds to correspond with the lyric.

As the piece moves out of the structured part we get more falsetto scat from Boz than we've heard in a bit. 

The piece expands into the funky groove space we've seen a lot on this tour and this is where it really gets interesting. Collins has a divebombing solo and Wallace is scattering about underneath it. Boz is dopping off of the one beat while Collins and Wallace frenzy. RF comps away alongside it all. Night after night, Collins is the stunt man here.

We get some more falsetto scat from Boz to join in Collins' honking.

And Boz and Wallace take us right into...

**Sailor's Tale**

This gets some response from the crowd and it's wonderful to hear this coming at you from the distance in the audience recording. RF really plays around and on top of the opening theme.

Collins bites down and there's this screaming, screeching bird-like madness that runs over the proceedings.

This is an assault from the band. It winds up and swings down into Wallace's hi-hat pocket and a plaintive solo from RF, and the crowd responds accordingly.

It's fascinating how little Robert pursues the slashing guitar solo opting instead for this sustained exploration throughout on this tour.

As the piece winds down we hear a member of the audience shout "Excellent!"

**Cirkus**

"Where's Jon Anderson," someone asks as the band moves into Cirkus. So we've got someone (somewhat) familiar with the album in this Miami Beach audience.

The mellotrons come in hot and heavy and Boz's vocal after it is almost a whisper. 

When we return to the main theme on mellotron it's such a wall of sound coming at you that the theme almost gets lost. It's one of the things that the 7 and 8 headed beast of Crimson redeems in the second decade of the new millenium.

One of the things that is missing from these 72 performances is that wonderful acoustic guitar accompaniment that Fripp adds to the vocals on the album. I've never heard anything like it before or since. And in the modern version Jakko admirably resurrects that color onto the song's canvas.

There's some kind of mellotron drop out after the last verse during the building, winding part before the drop in to the electric piano whirligig. But nevertheless the audience seems appreciative.

**Ladies of the Road**

The crowd seems to barely understand what RF's getting at as he introduces the piece. The big hall distance of the piece does well in the recording here. Not listenable for anyone other than the connoisseur in my opinion. Boz stretches into his upper vocal range in the chorus and gets a rousing cheer from the crowd.

I love Fripp's pizzicato banjo jingle ahead of Boz's scat entry to the final chorus return. It's hard not to imagine the players having smiles on their faces through this. This feels like a lot of fun.

This might be Boz's best vocal performance of the whole tour so far.

As rough as this recording is... it's a great performance of this piece overall.

**Groon**

Right into a _Groon_ shuffle. My goodness what cluttered madness is this? That has to be the reaction from the group. Fripp comes right out of the main theme with some sliding jazzy neck work. Collins immediately joins in and this jam is off to the races.

Almost without fail it seems as if the best performances from this tour have the worst recordings. No wonder _Earthbound_ is so on the edge of commercially listenable.

Fuck this is groovy when the band is wailing away and RF starts laying into the wah wah pedal. I look forward to the Summit Studios listen for March 12.

The band falls away and leaves room for another plaintive, sustain-driven RF solo. He's really taking this to some interesting places.

He gives way right into Wallace's drum solo. This is going to be interesting to hear from the audience's perspective.

Wallace sounds like five drummers here. He's pulling everything out of his kit here at the 10 minute mark all before the VCS3 enters. Getting lots of whistles from the crowd. My goodness Colonials love fireworks.

Wallace paraddidles away as the VCS3 enters. Lots of applause as he moves out of the kit and into a sheering rainstorm of cymbal work.

The audience response is respectfully enthusiastic. 

**21st Century Schizoid Man**

Wallace does an interesting march into Schizoid. I haven't heard that one before.

Between Boz's synth vocal and Collins bleating over the top of it there's a fresh madness here.

I'm listening to this and I'm thinking.... what more can be said? This is a raucous and stunning piece night after night. Another searing solo from RF. These solos all tread the same territory but none of them seem to take the same musical path for RF. I will never know how the man in these recordings now younger than me by nearly half found and explored what he wanted to express night after night in front of a hall or field of strangers with this piece. My sense is that this was a young person who had been touched literally and figuratively by Hendrix. Hendrix had found what it meant to do Guitar Incendiary and taught a generation of guitarists what that meant. Fripp is one of those.

For those unfamiliar it's worth recounting here Fripp's Hendrix story. In 1969, at the Marquee club in London, Hendrix came backstage after a Crimson show, his right arm in a sling, and walked up to Robert, stuck out his left hand and said "Shake my left hand man. It's closer to my heart." Gasp. Wonder. Awe. Brilliance. Luminosity.

And back to a spring night in southern Florida three years later. The band has zipped back into the unison part after Mel's solo. Fuck this is a stomper. Mel hollers over the final theme performance ahead of the final verse.

The crowd rightly goes nuts at the end of this. I mean nuts. Lots of stomping, whistling, wowing, and hollering for more. And they're going to get it. My guess is the band is headlining tonight and we're going to get an encore of the Crimso variety.

**Improv**

Elation as the band comes back for more. 

"Excuse us as we make it up as we go along," Boz announces.

Mel comes in on the flute adjoining Ian and Boz. As far as I can tell this is a trio to start. We move into some straight up funk with some more vocal improv from Boz. This is the strongest I've heard from him yet on this tour. He's really stretching out here. This makes me look forward to the higher fidelity Summit Studios recording.

Fripp once downplayed the contributions of this band as more of a blowing/jamming outfit than an improv one. This performance here begs to disagree. Certainly rooted in in the jazzy soul vocabulary of the time, but this piece comes from nowhere without any anchor and stands alongside any improv work the good ship Crimson would put forth later on.


**Cadence and Cascade**

The improv washes into _Cadence and Cascade_ and this gets an enthusiastic response from the crowd. Like really enthusiastic. It's still such a brave encore piece to rise above the cacophony of the night. 

This might be the best performance of Cadence I've heard from the band yet. Mel's flute work really stands out.

The audience is appreciative as they fade away.





 

 





