---
title: "March 6, 2003 - Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania - Stanley Warner Theater"
date: 2019-03-06T00:00:01-08:00
image: 'images/2003-03-06.jpg'
draft: false
---

## Context

We're back in the late winter of 1972 with Boz, Ian, Mel, and Robert. March 5 has Crimson in Marion, Ohio the night before and also in New York in 2003, for which no recording has yet been released.

Since we last left them in Florida the boys traveled back up to the mid-Atlantic and New England and began making their way west once again. Whoever booked this 1972 tour had a horrible sense of humor for these young fellows.

With another week or so of shows under their belt it will be interesting to hear what's evolved in the performances.

## Listening Notes

**Pictures of a City**

"What's Happening?" Boz asks just as they launch in. Officially the best sound of the recordings from this tour so far. There's very little overdriven in the recording here. The intro to the piece has some wonderfully subdued dynamics.

Mel's accompaniment to the intro lyrics is is a little more particular than what we heard in Florida. Ian's cymbals sound great in this recording. Robert and Mel have a lovely little frenzy right before the second verse and the mellotron comes in loud and strong! It almost drowns Boz out, but he makes up for it in the "Sweat and spin" lyric.

Robert's fast running lines are a little backgrounded here. I wonder if that's how it sounded in the house.

Robert and Mel accenting a bit more during the fast, running section.

My goodness there's a striking, wandering solo from Mel here that sounds like it jumped out of the past right into our living room.

**Formentera Lady**

Back in the second spot in the line-up. The gorgeous sound of Mel's flute sets the piece up well. 

The formentera main melody played by Mel on flute is darling. it would be interesting to know who/where this came from. Robert? Mel? 

We drift easily into the free section and Boz issues a plaintive version of the falsetto vocal improv. Ian and Boz take an easy groove in support of Mel's solo. Overall I'm loving this downtempo jazzy Crim. But it does begin to get a little frenzied. Boz's bass has dropped away and Robert seems to have sat back. It's just Mel, Ian, and a bit more of Boz's scat vocal that brings us into Sailor's Tale

**Sailor's Tale**

Robert's intro part ends with its own version of screeching to match Mel's. Mel unleashes a fierce solo. Despite the clearness of the sound in the recording there's an odd leveling problem between the players.

As we transition into Robert's solo section he begins far away and quiet and then begins to move forward. It would be really interesting to know how this sounded in the hall.

Boz and Ian really kick it forward in the final taranatella section with Robert delivering the final theme section.

**Cirkus**

"We'll play it when we're ready and not before." (Ian?)

"This is where I'm told I do an impression of David Frost." - RF

"We record an alarming amount of dross." - RF

Robert tells a story of the band listening to the recordings of the tour in Miami and falling about laughing at Robert's resemblance in tone and manner to British journalist David Frost.

This piece begins in a world of hiss and then bursts forward with the mellotron horn sounds

Are we in Pittsburgh? I'm pretty sure We're in Ploddington. There's a general lack of cohesion here in the second verse as Boz and Ian seem swampy and Mel seems manic in his delivery.

It makes me wonder whether this is just a piece that doesn't have much to offer the players at this point. Mel's solo over the mellotron theming doesn't seem to fit.

The section after "Ringmaster shouted, 'All the fun of the circus!" actually has some life in it. Again there's some play with the dynamics and unfortunately Ian's cymbal work is lost in the mellotron wash. The band and piece does seem to come back to life here. Boz's bass weaves the whole thing together into the honky-tonk section for Mel's solo. THere's some weird phasing in the recording like someone turned down the mic on Mel or he backed away from its range.

And unfortunately just when the piece was starting to come back together we've got some mellotron failure. Mel's? Not really sure.

**Ladies of the Road**

The band banters with a lady near the front of the stage.... this is base.

"Young lady this next song is dedicated to you," Boz.

"King Crimson's really together. We've really got our shit together."

"Fingers Fripp watch his licks."

A lot of fun about at the start of this here. May we forgive our younger selves their sins and carry forward the debt of their faults.

Boz really going for it with high diving Chinese trender.

Things get rude and almost uncomfortable in the chorus.

This is an unfortunately weak performance. 

**Groon**

Robert fiddles about with a jig ahead of Groon. There's even a clap-along. Will Groon redeem us here???

Will we rise above the dross? After the intro Mel goes in with his solo in search of something. There's a bit of rage and thrash in it.

It gives way to Robert who's doing some interesting right hand work here playing along with Mel. This transitions into a really funky shuffle breakdown. Ian takes over here. He guides the whole group through the jam. It's some of his most creative playing on the tour so far aside from the solos.

This gig might be worht the money for Ian's solo here. It goes to a dreamy place. The recording quality here is wonderful. There is a subdued and static-y entry to the VCS3-enabled portion of the solo. This drags for a bit, honestly. Ian's searching for a path to the fireworks. It takes a while but he finds them through a whirring spray that seems well received by the audience.

**21st Century Schizoid Man**

I'm settling in for this one. Good sound, good Groon lead in. Can't ask for much more to set up a Schizoid closer.

Strong start. Robert drops in and out a bit during his entry to the solo. But then unleashes a blisthering lash of a solo. Ian and Boz are right there with him. There's a great moment here where Boz and Ian pause and leave a Fripp note sustaining in the void then come back in. Someone (Boz?) screams off mic. 

There comes a point where it's hard to tell wehther this is Robert's solo or Ian's solo. The two make such fantastic noise here.

There's an odd hush during the unison parts. There's a great wind up into the final verse from Mel. And he simply HOWLS away as the theme is played for the final entry. The finale is met with enthusiasm and calls for MOAR!

**Improv I**



**Cadence and Cascade**

 
















