---
title: "February 26, 1972 - Jacksonville, Florida - Baseball Park"
date: 2019-02-26T14:28:35-08:00
image: 'images/1972-02-26.jpg'
draft: false

TODO: Check if any of this show was used for Earthbound
TODO: Check to see who else played on this bill. Was KC the opener?
---

*We are going to attempt to lurch into a form of life. - RF*

## Context

We continue the King Crimson tour of Florida of 1972. Journeying up from Miami Beach to the panhandle of Florida in Jacksonville. This seems like an unlikely place for King Crimson to visit. How strong would the counter-culture draw have been in Jacksonville at this time?

The band was probably still sharing the bill with ... at this time. I imagine a small army of counter-culture rock bands tearing around the wide swaths of the U.S. swirling in the energy of the fast and loose music industrial complex that was born out of the radical-ness of the 60s.  

## Listening Notes

**Pictures of a City**

Lurch says Fripp, but blast off is more like it. The sound here is pretty crunchy when the band is at full volume, but full of energy. 

It feels like they're taking the opening at a little slower tempo than some of the other shows. There's an avoidance of big fills ahead of each of they opening lyric sections which gives it this wonderful openness. The mellotron accompaniment from Mel is rich and juicy in this recording.

Fripp comes in the fast running section hot and with a couple of stumbles. Wallace's cymbal work over the top of Fripp and Collins unison play is really crisp sounding and fantastic here.

In Collins solo section he again explores some windy, climbing notes. Wallace follows him on the journey keying off Collins' build of energy. It's really awesome to hear Collins make this his piece throughout the 71-72 touring. Something he would reprise when he joined the band back on stage in 2014 and onwards.

As we exit the solo it's awesome to hear Collins move right into the mellotron accompaniment.

Boz really belts out the last verse with that "Lost in Hell" warning. That must have been fun every night.

The venue sounds cavernous. I wonder if it's a bandshell? But the audience is enthusiastic in their response to the opener.

**Cirkus**

The set list is beginning to change up from some of the earlier performances on this tour. Here we find Cirkus and it's mellotron madness in the second spot. I like it here better than Formentera. I wonder if the experience that is representative in the Miami Beach audience recording where the audience's attention wavered during Formentera was detectable from the stage and the band decided to move something a little more attention demanding into the second slot.

That being said it's not like this is exactly a rockabilly dance party number with its orchestral structuring and parlor story telling of mayhem. So I wonder how good it is at bringing a panhandle Florida audience along in the set. 

As much as these early performances of this piece don't quite do it for me the clarity of the mellotrons in the mix on this recording really helps make a difference. This must have felt like a wall of sound coming off the stage at times.

**Ladies of the Road**

Robert's guitar is a little faraway in the mix as this starts. Boz is taking a little gentler approach to the vocal as well. Wallace's bass drum really pounds about here as the tale of questionable courtship unfolds.

Boz lets out a bit of a chuckle as Mel barks and bites his way through the surf sax solo.

There's a grand pause ahead of the second verse which gets gritty and swampy and I can see this track finding its own home near the Florida-Georgia state line.

Boz breaks apart at the end of the final verse and scats his way to the finish. It seems rare in these performances that he is really able to get through this whole piece.

In the final refrain it sounds like Wallace joins him in harmony stronger than he does in the other performances.

I really love Robert's cross-picking ending here. Feels like it could be the kind of thing that could go off into a wide open space instead of winding down.

**Formentera Lady**

"Formentera?" Boz asks off mic to his bandmates.

I like the flute intro here coming off of the grittiness of _Ladies of the Road_. Boz also seems to switch his persona into a calmer place. As they work through the pastoral lyric this is holding together well for me. For Boz and Mel this might be my favorite of the tour so far.

Boz leads into the free section with some atonal vocal improv drawing on Paulina Lucas's performance from the album giving way to Collins sax. Wallace begins to push the band forward a bit and Collins joins in.

This slowly and surely begins to really groove together thanks to Wallace and Collins. If there was anyone in the crowd who wasn't convinced by a jazzy groove jam then this should have done them over. And this is the biggest stretch of jam we get tonight because there's no _Groon_ on the docket.

Wallace drops away from the groove and Fripp plays around with his wah pedal (not a euphemism) more than usual. Wallace dances about bit on the kit before we move into...

**Sailor's Tale**

Wallace really hammering away here getting to the front of the stage in this mix. Fripp has to climb up to meet him as Collins wailing comes in.

The band crashes through the opening tarantella based section and right into a plaintive RF solo accompanied by Collins' mellotron. This is a searching and searing solo from Fripp. Here he's playing with sustain and tone in a way that looks more forward to what we'd see out of him in his studio explorations with Eno just a few months later which would form the basis of the 'No Pussyfooting' album. It's one of those places where you could argue that either the moment is stretching towards the future or the future is stretching back towards the moment and trying to pull it forward.

Coming out of the composed piece with the mellotron we drop into more Wallace solo work. Lots of double bass-drum fireworks here. And we find ourselves winding through some VCS3 synthesizer madness.

Wallace gives space to the bends and spiraling warbles of the filtered notes. It's a fun event that was surely a crowd pleaser, but a somewhat anti-climactic ending for Sailor's here.

**21st Century Schizoid Man**

Speaking of crowd pleasers. The stalwart at play. Schizoid sounds crisp and clean. Fripp's solo washes away a bit behind the drum and bass noise in the mix, but it's scorching! And it stretches out for a good while. It's also really fun to hear Boz and Wallace back him here. At one point Boz lets out a howling scream. It really seems that RF has come alive in this solo and is guiding the whole scene into a new and wondrous space. 

Collins climbs in to join him and the whole band is really just blasting away. Barely controlled mayhem unfolds. The band backs away a little bit to give Collins space to say his piece. More stomping monster stuff right up until Fripp pulls them back into the unison piece. This sounds like magic. In one of the pauses during the unison parts there's another yowl. From a band or audience member? Who knows?

And we blast right into that final jazz rock section before the main riff. Collins howls... HOWLS over the top of the main theme at the end. Fucking raucous ending. File this in the leave 'em wanting more pile. A chorus of "more" is shouted from the audience as the tape cuts out.








 






 

