---
title: "February 27, 1972 - Orlando, Florida - Kemp Coliseum"
date: 2019-02-27T14:28:35-08:00
image: 'images/1972-02-27.jpg'
draft: false

TODO: Check that this is the Earthbound improv from the album
---


## Context

We end our Florida tour in Orlando. The land of Mickey Mouse. I'm not gonna lie. I'm going to need a break from this lovely group of fellas stomping around the U.S. in the winter and spring of 1972.

## Listening Notes

**Pictures of a City**

A raucous bouncy crowd accompanies some mellotron tuning. Or is it vice versa? We may never know.

The band lurches, as Robert says, into Pictures. The feel is much the same as the Jacksonville performance. A bit of feedback here and there. The recording quality a little worse for my money than Jacksonville.

Robert and Mel really thrash about underneath Boz's vocal pumping some energy into the opening.

Hearing the tight syncopated running section of Pictures it would be interesting to know more about how this piece came about with the original 69 band. How much of this was Ian McDonald's doing? How much Fripp's? How much the rest of that early band? One thing notable about this piece is it's the first piece that really took shape while Crimson was on the road in America. The good King's story is an imperial one. From its first tour of the states in 69 up to the modern day pieces like Pictures of a City, Neurotica, and Radical Action have taken form on the road in America.

Mel delivers yet another wild and ranging solo in the jazzy middle section. Fripp accompanies with some banjo thrash. How do these players sustain this night after night? I know they're young. Early to mid 20s but jeepers.

**Formentera Lady**

"Is there room to sit down at all?" Boz asks. I guess this is another way of saying we're going to bring it down a notch.

My goodness Mel Collins is versatile. His flute work is fantastic here... as usual. :)

The free section doesn't have any vocal improv from Boz. Instead he's got this bi bim-bim-bim bop-bop groove going with Wallace that Collins flies around and over with his sax work.

Man I love these funk breakdowns with Wallace's shuffle beat.

**Sailor's Tale**

Collins and Fripp are messing around and Wallace and Boz decide it's time to go into Sailor's apparently. So off we go. A bit of a harsh vector shift there.

I love the harmony Fripp and Collins achieve on the main phrase right before Collins takes off into his sheep bleat sax solo.

Another mellow sustain solo from RF accompanied by Mel on mellotron. The shift to this part gets some audience applause. It's a while before Ian comes back in with the hi-hat pocket. With each of these performances I miss the mellotron horn sound that ushers in the final ominous theme. But my goodness that tarantella run from Wallace is a thing of beauty. Ian Wallace the Spanish Tony Williams from England.

A slashing echo attack from Robert finishes this performance off nicely

**Cirkus**

The electric piano work from RF is front and center here along with Boz's vocal.

The piece is played honorably here, but it's hard to find any strong life in it for me. Boz is gentle with the lyric. Mel doesn't overstep on his solo following the "mirror stops turning" stretch.

But this just sounds like going through the paces work by the players here.

If I were coming at this as a Crimhead with no other live artifact of _Cirkus_ I'd probably be overjoyed by having this performance in my hands. But if I move on from this blogging and never return to this recording I'll be fine. 

**Ladies of the Road**

"It's very rude." -- Boz

Again, here it feels like the band is searching for some life particularly after hearing the performances from the past two nights.

Boz scats into Robert's solo and it's hard to see any real life pumped in. Boz comes back in with the chorus screaming and Mel is right there with him. This is a set of strong players searching for the outlet that gets the juice flowing right now.

**Groon**

There's a tape cut and we're off into _Groon_ in search of life. Some audience hollers and shouts accompany the opening. The free section gets some strummed jazz chords from RF and a Dexter Gordon exploration from Collins.

It's from Collins that things starts to come to life. His sax on this recording is out in the middle of the room ahead of the rest of the band.

_Groon_ redeems. Collins absolves.

Collins (or someone) groans as he hits a few bum notes in his run. It's always interesting how this piece finds its way to the drum solo. We get something close to a bass solo from Boz as Fripp seems unwilling or unable to step forward with the retreating Collins. And we go straight in to the drum solo.

This is a long one.... 5 minutes(!) of drum solo before the VCS3 even kicks in and then... several minutes more.

"Ian Wallace - head, hands, and nose" --Boz

**21st Century Schizoid Man**

King Crimson on a sleepy night is still better than most bands at their best. And that's what's criminal. Boz dials up the VCS3 effect on his vocal this evening and it's decidedly sub-human sounding.

Robert's lines in the running section are decidedly muted and he moves into a contemplative solo space for this one. It's quite a departure from the past couple of nights. But not devoid of life. He jumps about the fretboard with sustain and distortion kept at bay.

He injects a really interesting cross-pick jaunt in the corner of the solo and then builds up into a frenzy. This careens left and right and the band follows him along.

There's a wonderful breakdown middle section where Mel takes over and the band is taking this into places they haven't before with RF, Boz, and Ian all comping in unison for a bit as Mel hollers away ahead of the running da-da-dump da-da-dump da-da-dot do-do-dot section.

**Earthbound**

The crowd hollers for more and the band obliges. At the top of the upward swing on this performance we get the _Earthbound_ improv that would form the eponymous track on the live album.

This groove is a little slowed down versus the Miami Beach performance but gives Boz plenty of room to do his thing. This is central Florida swampy encore groove right here and I'm digging it.

Robert starts subdued but moves to an expansive and gritty solo space here. And the whole thing empties out into a gentle floating seque into...

**Cadence and Cascade**

... a landing with the gentle and innocent tale of three people: Cadence, Cascade, and Jade and their collective courtship. Boz breathes necessary gentleness into the lyric here. I love the tradition of the Crimson ballad. And I love the places where it ends a show. _Walking on Air_ in the 90s is a wonderful continuation of this.

A wonderful flute flourish from Mel closes this all out.






