---
title: "March 3, 2003 - Alexandria, Virginia - Birchmere"
date: 2019-03-03T00:00:01-08:00
image: 'images/2003-03-03.jpg'
draft: false

---

#ProjeKct Three

## Context

With no recordings documenting performances on February 28-29, or March 1-2 we jump ahead to March 3.

We also start to make it into a period of Crimson history that saw more early year touring. So we're starting to venture out of the 1972 winter/spring tour. 

This is an infamous night in 2003 as the band was just beginning their tour following the release of _The Power to Believe_ album. On this night front-man and stunt-guitarist Adrian Belew fell ill. Too ill to play in fact. The rest of the band: Fripp, touch guitarist Trey Gunn, and percussionist Pat Mastelotto were faced with a choice: cancel the show or go ahead with a performance by the trio. 

The decision was made and ProjeKct Three leapt into action. In the late 90s Crimson dissolved into a series of sub-groups called ProjeKcts which worked out mostly improvised material in front of audiences. ProjeKct Three had last performed at SxSW in Austin in the spring of 1999. So here four years later with some Crimson material to base an hour or so performance around they were re-born.

## Listening Notes

**Introductory Soundscape**

Robert Fripp's practice of using digital looping technology to create sonic structures called Soundscapes dates back to the early 90s and his collaboration with ex-Japan frontman David Sylvian. Of course, Fripp's usage of looping as an approach to improvisational composition on the guitar dates back to his 1972 collaboration with Brian Eno on the album _No Pussyfooting_.

For my part there are several different eras of Fripp Soundscaping.

1992-1993 - Blue Period - encompasses Fripp's early use of the technology and is best exemplified on Sylvian|Fripp's _Damage_ and Fripp's _A Blessing of Tears_.
1994-1996 - Radio Period - Soundscape explorations largely in support of Crimson Double Trio touring. 
1997-2000 - Space Period - Solo 'scape structures of a wide variety that include the Evening of Space Music tour of early 97, the pop-up style ambient performances like in Green Park Station and the World Trade Center 
2003-2008 - Solar Period I - Support scaping for Crimson which evolved into performances that put traditional soloing over the top of themes such as _At the End of Time_ and covers the ProjeKct Six work
2004-2011 - Solar Period II - Parallels Solar Period I but this lineage starts with the tone arrived at during the _Equatorial Stars_ sessions with Brian Eno and carries up through his collaboration with Theo Travis and then Jakko Jakszyk.

This introductory soundscape here is a prime example of early Solar Period and I love it.

I could loop a surround sound album of this era of scapes for a long time without getting bored.

It's difficult to write words about a soundscape. It's like writing about the details of ocean waves. These soundscape performances ahead of the King Crimson set re-shuffle the atmosphere of the room. They are modifiers of space and time. They generally serve to transition the room and the people in it away from the logistical complexity of getting seated in a big room, getting their beer or wine, perusing the merchandise, and chatting with their companions to a point where music can enter.

Here we have a lovely drifting scape of floating string sounds washing back and forth over each other. Something akin to a distant trumpet sound not too far off from the work of Jon Hassell ventures by occassionally and the low rumble of a bowed double-bass rows by as well.

Around 7:15 some mournful redeeming guitar sounds are provided. By RF or Trey? Not sure.

**Improv I**

The is joined fully by Pat and Trey. Pat hops about on his toms and Trey has this fat rumbly bass line that is rich and juicy here. Robert plays about on top of the scape and the rhythm but nothing super forward.

Halfway through the improv Robert winds down the soundscape and brings about his distinctive echoing vibraphone chords. Someone triggers a recording of distorted laughter and Pat shifts to a new pattern.

Robert comes in heavy with some industrial guitar and Pat picks up the vibe and drives things forward. Trey Gunn comes in with his own high-end guitar solo reminiscent of his work in the ProjeKcts more than any of his Double Duo Crimson persona. ProjeKct Three is here!

The group comes to a hard stop and there is much rejoicing in the Virginia crowd.

**Level Five**

This P3 take on the Double Duo monster instrumental starts off very different from the version that includes Belew. Pat begins with a programmed dance hall beat and then it drops right into the chord chomp section with Pat hammering and stopping a crash cymbal in unison with his bass drum beats. Robert and Trey execute their unison fast running lines perfectly and things are roaring along wonderfully here.

Robert executes his composed solo for the piece and then it enters the washy transition before what would be Adrian's solo. Instead Trey takes the reins here and it's lovely to hear his climbing and menacing approach to this stunt section. Robert and Pat are a wonderful rhythm section here for Trey and oh lordy this whole thing makes me wish the Double Duo had found more space for Trey to do some high-flying stunt work. This is exceptional.

Once again the piece wraps to a complete stop.

**Improv II**

Starting off with what feels like the same programmed beat from the start of Level Five Robert shifts to his xylophone tones and begins to solo away  like a second percussionist besides Pat while Trey bounces along with his juicy low-end bass.

RF drops away and Trey lets loose with a funky little run. RF switches to his fretless bass sound. Pat lets loose the closest thing you'll ever hear to a traditional drum solo. And for a while we just get Pat and Robert.

Trey joins them with a kind of double-tracked washy keyboard sound that bends and pitches around Robert's fretless bass sound. Overall the band sounds like they're really hunting to find something here.

It all peters out and the end is met with some chuckles from somewhere.

**The Power to Believe II**

We move into a piece that served as the steady middle transition point of the 2003 Double Duo's live set. This began in 2001 as a piece called _Shoganai_ and evolved into this piece. Pat explores a dizzying array of electronic wood block and water drop sounds here with some of Robert's echo-y chimes adjoining. Eventually Trey brings in the signature walking bass line sounding clean and lovely here which Robert then begins to solo over.

After the solo and winding down the bass line we get the sounds of Korean metal drumming. How much of this comes from Pat or Robert or Trey (or Adrian when he's part of the stage)? I can never tell. But this is a floating, transportational full group percussion solo.

Some strings wash over the proceedings ushering in some acoustic plucked string sounds. And a low rumble circles around the whole proceeding.

Somewhere in here the auto-tuned vocal almost-haiku from Adrian would enter:

She carries me
Through days of apathy
She washes over me

For the familiar it plays out in my head, and its absence here is poignant.

The percussion drops away and a soundscape reminiscent of the start of the show enters in. It sets the stage for the main bass line and percussion re-entry. Robert enters with his solo based on a melodic theme that I think of as The Power to Believe theme. 

Daryl Hall was once quoted as saying "When Robert plays guitar it's like the universe is crying." This theme is a universe tear-shedding solo on the level of the _Starless_ main theme for me. Always.

This is a gem of a performance that has moved me to tears. I look forward to revisiting this piece as these writings progress 

**FaKcts of Life**

What a transition! Pat and Trey hammer out some entry right into the thrashing solo section of _FaKcts of Life_. Here we are getting an instrumental re-work of one of my favorite song-based pieces from this era of Crimson-izing. Robert's slashing, blurry right hand work must have been on full display for the Birchmere audience here. 

If there were any punters who were hollering for _Sailor's Tale_ this night they should have been at least partially satisfied by the presentation of this right-hand guitar technique that formed the basis of the solo on that piece on display here.

The whole thing wraps up in less than two minutes. And we're greeted by a few moments of quiet as the band perhaps gets set up to go into the next piece.

**Sus-Tayn-Z**

One of my favorite pieces from the ProjeKct era of Crimson that never made its way into a proper Crimson piece unfortunately. It begins with Robert and Trey weaving a tapestry of mid-range sustained guitar notes. Here Pat joins them quickly (in comparison with other performances) with some bent and shifty metal sounds reminiscent of late 90s club beats.

Robert and Trey drift away from the mid-range sustain into a more scape-y world and this piece has quickly ventured away from its ProjeKct structure. It's all quite groove-able. I can see this being a crowd-pleaser at a trance music fest.

The piece explores a baseline world of menace and wonder that I find captivating. 

Each of the players winds their way out of the piece starting with Robert and ending with Pat and there's a lot of enthusiasm finding its way through the stage mics to the team.

**The Deception of the Thrush**

A mainstay piece throughout the ProjeKct and Double Duo eras is a natural element here for calling P3 into action on a moment's notice. It's one of those Crimson pieces that's different every night. Like Groon of 1971-1972, it's something we can look forward to in each of these recordings.

This performance begins nice and mellow with some glittering percussion sounds from Pat and string sounds from Robert before Pat hammers out some pounding bass drum notes and Trey conjures up the robotic ghost voice of T.S. Eliot reading bits of poetry.

Pat's pulling all the tricks out here adding lots of texture and space ahead of Robert enters with a long and sonorous solo. The solo winds away and Robert comes back in with his Strings of Redemption sound (as I like to call them). 

It's showcase time for Trey's solo-ing skills. Without fail we have a lovely soaring solo from Trey that transports the whole show to a new level. With that we are at the set's end.

**VROOOM**

A trio version of VROOOM gets off to a false start. The band tries to get in once and stalls out. There's some laughs, cheers and chatter. Then Pat counts the band in to  a proper beginning.

It sounds as if Trey and Robert have both punched up the distortion a bit here to occupy the available auditory space. Robert does a little stumble into the first fairy fingers cross-picking section but recovers as Trey does a great takek on the singing bass line here.

I'm really loving Trey's deep and meaty bass sound in the heavier, unrelenting forward motion sections. In the fairy finger sections Robert's a bit loud vs. Trey in the mix. 

The band gets an enthusiastic applause depsite the bumps and stumbles. And P3 has discharged an honorable performance on short notice.

**Q & A**

 



 



 

 

 



